---
title: Azimuthal Theories
bibliography: blogs/2019-3-azimuthal-theories.bib
...

*Published March 15, 2019.*

***

> The New Yorker map of the United States went on to reflect the New Yorker's
> notions in the very sizes the several areas appeared to have on the map. Our
> Mercator world maps have done much the same thing for our Western world
> image. Some say the Mercator world map is so popular because it shows the
> correct angles essential for navigation (even though its shapes are almost as
> badly distorted as its areas). But if you use a map not for navigating but
> for placing and comparing at a glance different parts of the world, shapes
> and areas are more important than angles. Moreover, areas are more important
> than shapes, because they have cultural implications. What is objectionablea
> bout the Mercatorw orld map in fact is not that it distorts the shape of
> North America, nor even that it shows Greenland so large-our conception of
> Greenland makes little difference. Rather, it is that it shows India so
> small, and Indonesia, and all Africa. (I call such a world map the "Jim-Crow
> projection" because it shows Europe as larger than Africa.)
> [@Hodgson1963, 228]


# Prelude: Perception

Here is an obvious fact: train tracks running off into the distance appear to
converge but do not in fact converge. Why is this? One might start talking
about perspective. Think of a canvas placed between the tracks and an observer.
Draw lines from her to the ends of a close tie and the angle is quite obtuse;
draw again to the ends of a distant tie and the angle is acute. In the former
case the lines pierce the canvas at distant points and in the latter in tight
pairs. This is just perspective, one might conclude, the sort of thing Euclid taught us.

But we do not see with a canvas placed at a close remove: we see with our eyes.
Fair enough, but the principle of the thing holds. Perhaps we should instead
imagine a sphere encasing the head instead (our eyes are more or less spheres)
and end up with a non-Euclidean geometry of the visible. [As, apparently,
Thomas Reid did, cf. @Daniels1972.] This model too oversimplifies---it does
not, for example, give us an account of binocular vision---though perhaps there
is something to it: the points at a distance strike closer together on the
retina and so appear closer.

Why, however, should two points striking closer on the retina mean that they
appear closer? There is surely no deep necessity here: there could be a
creature with eyes like ours who had *isometric* vision. For them, train tracks
would not diminish in apparent size as they got further away. This child's
drawing perspective is odd, but is not inconceivable. Moreover, as
@Hatfield2011 informs us, modern perceptual psychology suggests that apparent
space is not so neatly mathematical as the above models would have it [cf. @Wagner2018]. The
apparent size of objects diminishes "less rapidly than would be predicted by
the diminution in visual angle angle" (47). Our visual experience is more like
a Roman fresco than a Rennaissance painting.

![The early days of architectural painting.](/images/roman-fourth-style.jpg){width="100%"}

If geometry, then, does not determine apparent diminuition of size with
distance, we should wonder what does. In recent, unpublished work Hatfield
suggests a broadly evolutionary explanation. The closeness of distant points on
the retina is relevant, but relevant only insofar as with the compressed
retinal distance comes decreased available visual information. Think of our
fantastical isometric friend again. Suppose she is looking at, say, the Bayeux
tapestry rolled out lengthwise away from her. It would appear to her as a
perfect, quite long rectangle. The farther regions, further up in her visual
fields, however, would likely be blurred or pixelated as fewer pieces of
information (fewer stimulations of rods and cones) had to take up equivalent
apparent area.

The human visual system, then, diminishes far off objects to maintain a
relative constancy of information-per-area, this being a useful feature. This
system has other attractions: allowing us to estimate relative size and distant
and orient ourselves in our environment. As a consequence, Hatfield suggests,
we should think of this phenomenon not as misrepresenting the size of distance
objects, but presenting objects in a way that makes salient certain features of
the objects and their arrangements. (That is, though our vision does indeed
represent distant objects with less apparent size it does not represent them as
having less physical size.)

# Maps

Something similar clearly holds for maps. In the cartographic case, the
organizing scheme of the representation owes itself to the intentions of a
designer, rather than to evolution, but the goal is the same: to compress a
complex three-dimensional arrangement in a way that makes it easy to extract
useful information. The Mercator projection, for instance, preserves angles
but, like our vision, has objects closer to the equator diminish in apparent
size. Again, it is not that the Mercator projection represents, say, that
Greenland is larger than Brazil, but that it does represent Greenland more
prominently than it does Brazil.

![The Mercator Projection, credit [Wikimedia](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mercator_with_Tissot%27s_Indicatrices_of_Distortion.svg).](/images/mercator-indicatrox.svg){width="100%"}

Here, I am disagreeing verbally with @Hodgson1963. I do not think that the
Mercator projection "shows Europe as larger than Africa" (228).^[While a
geographic amateur might, on first glance, conclude from the map that Europe is
larger than Africa, this is to misread what the map represents rather than to
read, correctly, its misrepresentation.] But I take his point as valuable and
want to reframe it slightly. He offers an explanation of the popularity of the
map, despite its potentially misleading foreshortening, in that "it flatters
our egos" (229). Importantly, he understands this foreshortening as, in effect,
offering less information, a lower resolution, for regions nearer the equator.

For Hodgson, this serves as a metaphor for Western, European historical
understanding. As he elaborates (229-231), in this understanding there is the
*mainstream*, those civilization and historical forces leading to us, now, and
everything else. The former, Greece, Rome, etc., are foregrounded, elaborated
in some detail, while everything else recedes into the distance. The
possibility that the foregoing discussion highlights is that such a narrative
could be spun so as to mislead without misrepresenting. By virtue of providing
comparatively more information to a certain region, one inflates its apparent size relative to the unloved countries.

# Pictures

What I am interested in here are the practical, non-alethic, non-epistemic
features of representation. What are those? Well, consider a belief, say my
belief that my colleagues respect me. We can evaluate this belief for its truth
or falsity, or its justification: do I know this, or is it merely a pleasant
delusion. One can also think about what this belief does for me. Certainly, I
would be much more on edge around my colleagues were I to lack this belief.
This practical evaluation can come apart from the others. It can be good that I
believe something (good for me, even) despite its being false or my belief's
being unjustified.

A useful point made here by Joshua Smart is that while we evaluate beliefs or
claims for truth or falsity we do not evaluate maps or pictures for simple,
binary truth or falsity. Rather, a picture encompasses many claims and can be
accurate or inaccurate. And while the accuracy of a picture depends on the
truth of its associated claims, it is not a simple function of them. Consider a
map that swapped the places of Africa and South America: it could represent
very many things truly (for example, the internal geography of the continents),
but would as a whole be highly inaccurate. Correspondingly, a map could be
riddled with small errors and still be on the whole accurate. As Smart further
notes, whole theories or systems of beliefs are like pictures in this regard;
they can be accurate or inaccurate to greater or lesser degrees and this is not
determined simply by how many of their constituent claims or beliefs are true
or false.

Besides, but not unrelated to, the accuracy of a belief-system is its
*practical value*, what it does for or to the believer. For example, our mental
cartography hugely exaggerates the apparent area of our homes and places of
work. I have beliefs, thousands of them, likely, about the contents of my
bookshelf and very few at all about those in the nearest library (though it has
many more books).^[An aspect of beliefs that is not well captured by this
metaphor is not merely their presence but their salience. I might waste my time
memorizing the catalog of my local library to the point that I had as many
beliefs about their books as a librarian working there. Still, her beliefs
about those books would be more salient to her (come up to awareness and use
more frequently) than my corresponding beliefs are to me.] This egocentricity
is obvious and, as I take the previous discussion to forebear, not necessarily
a misrepresentation.

# Conclusion

These remarks were prompted by @Mills2007's "White Ignorance." The concern
there is to begin to chart the dynamics of white ignorance (roughly: false and
missing beliefs resulting from and germane to social racial injustices). The
essay canvases a litany of failures, from ignorances that are purely epistemic
(where one fails to properly weigh the evidence in one's possession) to
morally-based ignorance (where one fails to collect or even destroys evidence).
I am just dipping my toe into the whole literature, so I do not have anything
useful to say in general. Here I wanted to make the small point that there
seems to be a relevant species of doxastic failure (call them failures of
emphasis) where ones beliefs do not necessarily misrepresent or omit crucial
details but simply misguide.

# References