---
title: Editing, Ed. 1
...

I want to try out a series in which we try to resuscitate poems and perhaps figure out some things about editing. I saw this poem by Robert Service in a [Dan Schneider essay](http://www.cosmoetica.com/S7-DES5.htm#Wide%20Open%20Spaces:%20Robert%20Service,%20Banjo%20Paterson,%20John%20G.%20Neihardt,%20&%20the%20Cowboy%20Poets) and wanted to take a stab at it. The idea of reworking old, bad poems also comes from Schneider's series "That Old Poem," though here I am rewriting rather than editing.

# Dark Truth

>| Birds have no consciousness of doom:
>| Yon thrush that serenades me daily
>| From scented snow of hawthorn bloom
>| Would not trill out his glee so gaily,
>| Could he foretell his songful breath
>| Would sadly soon be stilled in death.
>| 
>| Yon lambs that frolic on the lea
>| And incarnate the joy of life,
>| Would scarce disport them could they see
>| The shadow of the butcher's knife:
>| Oh Nature, with your loving ruth,
>| You spare them knowledge of Dark Truth.
>| 
>| Tis sad humanity alone,
>| (Creation's triumph ultimate)
>| The grimness of the grave is known,
>| The dusty destiny await ….
>| Oh bird and beast, with joy, elance
>| Effulgently your ignorance!
>| Oh man, previsioning the hearse,
>| With fortitude accept your curse! 

# The Core and the Detritus

The first line is not bad. Ever subsequent line, however, provides only the most obvious and minimal development. This sort of literary auto-pilot is eased by form, where a poem can stretch its thin ideas to reach a task-list of end rhymes. (Not to say that free verse inoculates one from this.)

There's one thought here: non-human animals' lack of death consciousness frees them from anxieties and so makes them more joyful. Nothing much is done with this thought. It is not revealed by the poem: it is stated up front in the first line. Nor is it interestingly developed: no new layers or follow-up on this idea develop. I want to see if we can rework this poem to do something interesting with this idea, and present a couple of alternatives below.

# March 19^th^, 2013

>| Worried the bearers would stumble
>| all through service, my shined
>| shoes twitch as outside thrushes sing
>| something not to them an elegy.

The main thing I wanted to accomplish in this reworking is to take this envy for animals' freedom from the consciousness of death and bring it into a situation where it can be organically raised. Of course all humans think about death and so have an intimate if varied relationship with the anxiety it provokes. In that sense the thought that animals are free of this anxiety even in the abstract can mean something. In poetry, however, it is preferable to go beyond the presentation of a thought to the presentation of a situated act of thinking. After all, ideas are not merely free-floating things, but have their own place in our lives in which they occur.

Therefore, I have constructed a narrative in which the idea might naturally occur. Naturally, we would be thinking of death at a funeral. We would have our idiosyncratic reaction. (It is, in fact, universal to have an idiosyncratic experience, though not of course to have one in particular.) We might feel nervous, anxious about the proceedings, as in this case, or we might be swept up in grieving and reminiscing. The former is less obvious and so perhaps more interesting to portray. What is crucial is that we have our own particular relationship to the death and to the deceased, and so what is to strike us is that, howsoever weighty this is to us, it is not universal.

There is this scene in the film *Mandy*. Nicolas Cage's wife has just burned to death in front of him. The same murderous cult that killed her had him tied up with barbed wire, and he has just loosened himself and walked back inside. The television is playing. In particular, it is playing a silly cartoon for a children's toy, with a mascot bouncing back and forth. It is at this point when the emotional outburst starts: not when he has suffered a great loss, but when it becomes apparent that the world as a whole does not recognize this great loss.

A personal loss is not just the loss of a person, but the loss of all experiences that person's existence made possible. As such it is a loss of some aspect of every object of experience. Each book on your bookshelf is no longer one you could discuss with your friend, each seat one they no longer could occupy. This change, we understand, is not a real change in the objects: it is a change at most in their "Cambridge properties." But it is precisely this understanding which is painful, as it reveals a gap between the world and our own experience. This gap is of course most profound in the case of our own death, the world carrying on past our experience, but we of course will not be around to see it.

# Although possums play dead, they do not quite seem to get the concept.

>| Likewise the lamb won't recognize the gun
>| that shot its brother. Say a chicken runs
>| unknowing headless twenty seconds after
>| its death, of which it lived heedless. A pasture
>| boundless contains all creatures but us: born
>| and buried, not as a squirrel buries an acorn.

A weaker poem, in my estimation, but I wanted to get a little closer to the original; at the least I wanted some sort of form. This was in part inspired by a [video of lamb slaughter](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uaqRzWft_b4): the farmer shot a bolt through a lamb right next to another lamb, which reacts more in confusion than in horror. There is something a little funny about that, which I wanted to capitalize on here: yes the consciousness of death is a sort of burden, but its lack is also burdensome.

The other thing to do, coupled with that, is just to get in more colorful examples. If what you're after is this contrast --- animals die and are close to death, but they don't fully conceptualize it --- you want to dramatize the contrast. The original does this in a feeble, overly-simple way: the thrush and the lamb live in a generically happy way and die in a generically sad or morbid way. We can put more color on that. Likewise with the contrast between humans and other animals: if the idea is that we're set apart from animals by virtue of our consciousness of death, we can do better than flatly stating the idea.

# Concluding Thoughts

There are a number of sins of the original I have tried to cure.

* Boring, vague title.
* Plain statement of a thesis.
* Filler development.
* Maudlin tone.

I think the main takeaway is that one thought is typically not sufficient for a poem. Any semi-competent writer can take a concept and spin it out straightforwardly for any number of stanzas. Typically, though, we want something that is more productive, more bountiful than that. Otherwise, the result will be, as here, lifeless.