---
title: A Symbolic Argument against a Symbolic Monarchy
...

A *monarchist* believes that, in at least some cases, monarchy can be
justified. While monarchies are not what they used to be, monarchism in this
permissive sense is still going strong: according to @youGovBritishMonarchy,
two-thirds of the British populace support their monarchy, and, as a host of
editorials impress,^[For example, @Stack2017 and @Alexandra2017.] the royals
enjoy even greater enthusiasm State-side. The sort of monarchism this
represents, though, is a traditional, symbolic variety, where royalty is
treated as nothing much more serious than a national monument---accessories to
Windsor Palace rather than bona fide bearers of political power.^[This is not
true in the case of the British monarchy, which has considerable political
authority that it does, discreetly, exercise. C.f. @Booth2013.]

There are of course much stronger forms of monarchism. Contemporary
monarchists, to the small extent that they exist, argue for a more robust
monarchy. They may think think monarchy is compatible with democracy, or, even
stronger, that monarchy is the highest expression of monarchy, e.g.
@Medaille2010. A frequent thought is that constitutional monarchies provide an
effective check on the excesses of representative or parliamentary
governments, e.g. @Davis2014 and @Yeager2011. These defenses are a farcry from
the pragmatic absolutism of Thomas Hobbes' *Leviathan* or the scriptural
absolutism of Robert Filmer's *Patriarcha*. Which is not to say that
monarchists are all liberals of some description, there are certainly  
anti-democratic monarchists such as @KuehneltLeddin1952.^[One could extract
another anti-democratic argument for monarchism from @Hoppe1995's argument
that monarchies are necessarily less "present-oriented" and so more closely
approximate the anarcho-capitalist ideal.] I am here, however, more
interested in a modern, quasi-liberal monarchism, one that would appeal to
liberal-sounding principles---*checks and balances,* *democracy,* yadda 
yadda---in its defense.

It is important to note that this an extremely fringe position. A search of
the  [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy](https://plato.stanford.edu) reveals
no non-historical discussions of monarchy. Monarchists, no doubt, would see
this as just another failure of contemporary, left-wing bias in academia.
However, given that serious discussion of eugenics (@Agar2008) and infanticide
(@Singer2013) are possible in the current climate, this is not a highly
plausible explanation. More plausible is that monarchism has no academic
standing because it has received no serious defense.^[I invite the reader to
look for themselves and tell me if I have underestimated an argument from one
of the cited sources, or if there is a powerful defense I have overlooked.] A
plausible explanation for this lack of defense is that monarchism is in fact
indefensible. Whatever the case, I will assume this is right and that none of
the more robust forms of monarchism are correct. Still, mightn't the much more
moderate form I led the essay with be right? Couldn't we accept monarchs as
mere figureheads?

# Monarchism Defined

Before attempting an answer to the questions, I should say what I mean by
monarchy. This definition is not meant to remotely capture the ordinary
meaning, but it at least resembles it enough to enable discussion. I will say
that someone is a *monarch of some society* if she is generally viewed as
occupying a privileged, unique position in that society by its members that
only people with certain hereditary relations to her can play. A *monarchy* is
the collection of all monarchs in some society. I use *royal/royalty* as
synonyms for *monarch/monarchy*. I intend to use "hereditary" in a very
expansive sense to include things like adoptive or nominative successors ---
by my lights, the Roman emperors count as a monarchy.

# Monarchy Defended

Having said what a monarchy is, what can be said for *symbolic monarchism*?
Recall that, under this view, symbolic monarchies --- those that have no
political power, but have some social, cultural or other special standing ---
are possibly justified. Are there any good defenses of this position?
Ultimately, I will argue no: symbolic monarchism is false and none of the
prima facie plausible arguments for it succeed. But let us first look at the
sorts of arguments one can give. I will lay out three in the following
sections that, taken together, I think amount to a plausible case for this
position. (Keep in mind how weak this claim is; it holds only that a monarchy
*could* be justified, leaving open whether any actually are justified.)

I should note that I mean to use "possible" in a quite restricted sense --- I
mean possible in societies that are at least somehwat like ours. It is after
all possible that an alien species comes to earth that will torture everyone
to death unless we accept their royal family as the Official Kings of Earth. I
assume that, in this situation, it would be best to acquiesce. I mean to,
however, include royalties that would be highly attractive: ones where every
member was morally outstanding, that had unimpeachable histories, were
universally beloved, charitable, net boons to their society, and so on.

## A Consequentialist Argument

Though royal families have quite the upkeep, it seems empirically plausible
that a symbolic monarchy can do more good than harm. Indeed, given that
royalty are often tourist attractions, they need not cost their country
anything (c.f. @Khazan2013), and, given the popularity of events like the
royal wedding or royal births, they plausibly bring substantial enjoyment to a
wide number of people. Some grouches, like myself, may despair at the
slightest mention of the royals, but if it wasn't them, it'd be some other
thing. We can at least imagine, in any case, that the overall wellbeing
(however we are to understand it) that comes along with a monarchy could at
least be well in the black. If this is so, if in some sense symbolic monarchs
can make the world a better case, wouldn't we have good reason to keep them
around? This seems eminently plausible and so suggests the following argument.

1. Maintaing a monarchy can improve overall wellbeing.
2. If an arrangment improves overall wellbeing, then that arrangement is 
   morally justified.
3. Therefore, the existence of a monarchy can be morally justified.

I call this a "consequentialist argument," because the second premise is the
sort of claim a
[consequentialist](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism/) might
make. I would note that there are close cousins of this argument that need not
assume consequentialism. For the sake of simplicity, I omit discussion of
them.

## A Democratic Argument

One fact I mentioned in the introduction was that countries with symbolic
monarchism can enjoy strong, even overwhelming public support for keeping
their monarchies around. Their desires should count for something; especially
in the case where the monarchy is not doing anyone any harm, or as above are
doing some good, it seems like it would be unjust to ignore their desire. The
proviso that the monarchs cause no harm is an important one as one can
multiply indefinitely cases where immoral arrangements enjoyed popular
support. This limits the dialectical power of this argument as we must already
believe that monarchies can be morally acceptable for the public support to
count for anything. But the idea would be that, without any power, what harm
could the monarchy be doing really? Putting this argument into the numbered
format that boring people like myself enjoy, we get.

1. It is possible that maintaining a monarchy be popularly supported and 
   morally acceptable.
2. If an arrangement is popularly supported and morally acceptable,
   that arrangement is morally justified.
3. Therefore, it is possible that maintaining a monarchy is morally 
   justified.

## A Symbolic Argument

One line that is popular among the more serious defenders of monarchism is
that the monarchy embodies or exemplifies cultural traditions or values. The
idea is that the royal line can have symbolic connections to venerable
institutions and, at least when well-behaved, exemplify the values of the
society they represent. Exactly how this is supposed to work and what's so
good about it can be a little vague. If the idea is just that royals can serve
as role models or inspire fuzzy feelings about one's country's glorious (?)
past, this collapses into the consequentialist argument. A distinctive variant
of this argument is that the monarchy itself is a form of symbolic speech. But
if this so, who is speaking and what are they saying? Possibly, the
maintenance of a monarchy is an expression of the members of a society of
their endorsement of things like the value of their institutions and their
pride in their history. Making something like this clear would involve us in
thorny philosophical issues like [collective
intentionality](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/collective-intentionality/)
and [agency](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/shared-agency/) as well
as making sense of symbolic speech (c.f. @Berckmans1997). However, I think
we have a reasonable intuitive grasp of what it is for a collection like
a society or government to engage in symbolic speech. On this way of
putting things, monarchs can be worth having because they can say things
worth saying. Put in a numbered form.

1. Maintaining a monarchy can express moral values while otherwise being
   morally acceptable.
2. If an arrangement expresses moral values and is morally acceptable,
   then that arrangement is morally justified.
3. Therefore, it is possible that maintaining a monarchy is morally 
   justified.

## Taking Stock

If any of the above three arguments are sound, then it is at least possible
that we have reason to maintain a monarchy. Of course the principles behind
the argument can be brought in defense of specific monarchies --- one could,
and people do, argue that the British monarchy should be kept because it makes
money, is popular, represents the splendor of British civilization, and so on.
But even if no actual monarchy makes the cut, the overall case the above
arguments represent is reasonably strong: symbolic monarchism seems on good
footing.

# Monarchism Attacked

Though I am ignoring other arguments for other forms of monarchism, the
argument I will run afflicts all forms of monarchism. That is, though the
conclusion will be that symbolic monarchism is false, since symbolic
monarchism is the weakest form of monarchism, if it is false, all monarchisms
are false. Anyways, here's the argument.

1. Necessarily (in our restricted sense of possibility), maintaining a monarchy
   expresses moral disvalues without leading to substantial improvement in
   well-being.
2. If an arrangement expresses moral disvalues without leading to substantial
   improvements in well-being, then that arrangement is not morally justified.
3. Therefore, it is not possible that maintaining a monarchy is morally
   justified.

Before actually defending the argument, let's explain and motivate it. By
"expressing moral disvalue," I mean to refer to symbolic speech that endorses
actions or claims that are morally objectionable. So the KKK burning crosses
expresses moral disvalue because it endorses racist beliefs. I will leave it
vague how much improvement it takes to get "substantial" improvement. 

The intuition behind this argument is the following: that some act expresses
something morally objectionable is a strong reason not to do it. Moreover, the
wrongness of 

# References