---
title: Riddles
author: Damon Stanley
...

> And We have already created man and know what his soul whispers to him, and We are closer to him than his jugular vein. (Quran, Sahih International, 50:16)

How close is God? On one answer, God is in heaven, which, by some tellings, is a place on earth. Whatever this place is, though, it is likely at a distance: farther, at least, than parts of our own bodies. On another, heaven is not a place, not in the way Topeka is a place at least, and God is not in any one place. God might not be anywhere because he is, in some sense, everywhere, or perhaps he is nowhere. This is a debate of some pedigree --- it was taken up in correspondence between Ren&eacute; Descartes and Henry More. Whichever side prevails, neither approach promises an answer to the question. How close is the universe to London? How close are we to the number two? In neither case could we even in principle cite a distance. It seems then that the statement is either obviously false or confused: God is either further than our jugular veins or the comparison cannot be carried out.

I am no doubt being ridiculous. The quote clearly does not mean closer *geographically speaking*. But what does it mean then? We might think of being close in terms of intimacy, the way we might be close to a pen pal, or being close in the sense of similarity, the way one might be close to God, or being close in the sense of immanence, the way one, again, might be close to God.^[I am pretending here that the Arabic term has the same resonances as the English. This is not meant as a serious bit of hermeneutics.] The sense of intimacy and immanence are plausibly what is meant, and so my clowning is resolved. As a bit more clowning, though: I, at least, do not feel much intimacy with my jugular vein. I appreciate what it does for me, but, you know, it's not it, it's me. Nor is the vein particularly immanent; in my vanity, I think very little of it. So on these readings of 'closer,' it is fairly obvious that God is closer (more intimate, more immanent) than one's jugular. While saying something trivially true is better than what most people manage, it is not much better than saying something false or confused.  

The accusations of being ridiculous have no doubt grown stronger and patiences are wearing thin. What is meant is just this: that God is more intimate than a jugular vein is near. Fine. But what on Earth does *that* mean? As a comparison, the Egyptians might have thought that an innocent's life weighed less than a feather, but what exactly are the units on a life, and the conversion factor from those units into grams?^[Of course, meaningful comparisons can be made even in the absence of units. We can say that *Hamlet* is better than *Titus Andronicus* without having any measurements of quality. Indeed, we can make meaningful comparisons across modalities when we can think of the quantities as sliding along a scale (as then there is an implicit unit of *percentage progress along the relevant scale* that unifies them). Psychologists exploit the meaningfullness of these sorts of comparisons by having subjects rate the intensity of a pain in comparison to an intensity of light. Given this, we can think of an innocent's life as being minimally sinful while a feather is not-quite minimally heavy. Likewise, the verse would mean that God is maximally intimate while a jugular vein is almost-but-not-quite maximally near. This reading is most likely correct and makes good literal sense. It is here that I must ask indulgence: my goal is not a hermeneutical understanding of the text but to use it as a grabby jumping off point.] Let us imagine, as I am sure that many readers will have insisted already, that this verse is metaphorical. But what is it for a sentence to be metaphorical? Consider Donne's claim that he is "a world made cunningly." He says this, but he cannot really mean it. Indeed, we might loosely define *metaphorical speech* as that which says something it does not mean.

Can we distinguish between saying and meaning? Initially, the distinction does not appear to be sharp. If I tell you that Gabriel said that she passed the exam, I mean something like that Gabriel uttered "I passed the exam" or that she uttered something that meant that she passed the exam (she might have uttered it in a different language) or perhaps that she uttered something that implied that she passed the exam (she might have said "I got a B on the exam"). So it seems that sayings cannot be disentangled from meaning, and when asking what a text says it does not seem that we are asking about anything other than its meaning. This reduces our definition to the nonsensical: metaphorical speech does not mean what it means. But this definition is nonsense, or, appropriately enough, is itself metaphorical. Actually, worse than both of these, it is wrong.

Metaphors mean what they mean. Moving beyond the tautological, Davidson in "What Metaphors Mean" argues that "metaphors mean what the words, in their most literal interpretation, mean, and nothing more." I do not intend to rehearse the arguments of that paper, but to highlight two conclusions. First that "absurdity or contradiction in metaphorical sentence guarantees we won't believe it and invites us, under proper circumstances, to take the sentence metaphorically." Second, Davidson understands taking a sentence metaphorical not as divining some non-literal meaning but as attending to the effects the metaphorical speech has on us. This is, I think, importantly right, but more can be said. We can start by observing, as Davidson does, that some effects are intended and others not. When, sparked by "a world made cunningly," I think of myself as a *creation* of a wise *creator*, Donne is surely nodding somewhere. When I think instead of myself as globularly obese, like the man who was Thursday, he might be somewhat less enthused. This difference in the intention of the author is meaningful.

There is a natural distinction between the meaning of an utterance and what the speaker intended to convey. Consider a case of misspeaking: tongue-tied I say, "The lawn is looking very mean," when I intended to say that lawn is looking very green. I might say that a friend's suit is very boldly-colored when what I mean to convey is that it is ugly. This last sentence suggests that "mean" and "intend"